Course Syllabus for "CS202: Discrete Structures"
------------------------------------------------

This course has been designed to provide you with a clear, accessible
introduction to discrete mathematics. Discrete mathematics describes
processes that consist of a sequence of individual steps (as compared to
calculus, which describes processes that change in a continuous manner).
The principal topics presented in this course are logic and proof,
induction and recursion, discrete probability, and finite state
machines. As you progress through the units of this course, you will
develop the mathematical foundations necessary for more specialized
subjects in computer science, including data structures, algorithms, and
compiler design. Upon completion of this course, you will have the
mathematical know-how required for an in-depth study of the science and
technology of the computer age.

### Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, you will be able to:

-   create compound statements, expressed in mathematical symbols or in
    English, to determine the truth or falseness of compound statements
    and to use the rules of inference to prove a conclusion statement
    from hypothesis statements by applying the rules of propositional
    and predicate calculus logic;
-   prove mathematical statements involving numbers by applying various
    proof methods, which are based on the rules of inference from logic;
-   prove the validity of sequences and series and the correctness of
    repeated processes by applying mathematical induction;
-   define and identify the terms, rules, and properties of set theory
    and use these as tools to support problem solving and reasoning in
    applications of logic, functions, number theory, sequences,
    counting, probability, trees and graphs, and finite state machines;
-   calculate probabilities and apply counting rules;
-   solve recursive problems by applying knowledge of recursive
    sequences;
-   create graphs and trees to represent and help prove or disprove
    statements, to make decisions or select from alternative choices, to
    calculate probabilities, to document derivation steps, or to solve
    problems; and
-   construct and analyze finite state automata (another name for
    machines), formal languages, and regular expressions.

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course, you must:  
  
 √    Have access to a computer;  
  
 √    Have continuous broadband Internet access;  
  
 √    Have the ability/permission to install plug-ins or software (e.g.
Adobe Reader or Flash);  
  
 √    Have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer;  
  
 √    Have the ability to open Microsoft files and documents (.doc,
.ppt, .xls, etc.);  
  
 √    Have competency in the English language;  
  
 √    Have read the [Saylor Student
Handbook](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Saylor-StudentHandbook.pdf);  
  
 √    Have completed the following prerequisite courses from [The Core
Program](http://www.saylor.org/majors/computer-science/) of the computer
science discipline, including
[CS101](http://www.saylor.org/courses/cs101/) and/or
[CS102](http://www.saylor.org/courses/cs102/) for use of functions and
procedures, conditional statements, loops, recursion, data types, and
evaluation of expressions;  
  
 √    Have skills in basic algebra and calculus.

### Course Information

Welcome to CS202: Discrete Structures. General information about this
course and its requirements can be found below.  
    
 **Course Designer:** J. M. Perry  
    
 **Primary Resources:** This course comprises a range of different free,
online materials. However, the course makes primary use of the following
materials:  

-   Srini Devadas and Eric Lehman’s *Mathematics for Computer Science:*
    “Logic”
-   University of California, San Diego: Edward Bender and S.
    Williamson’s Lectures in Discrete Mathematics: *Arithmetic, Logic
    and Numbers: Unit BF: Boolean Functions and Computer Arithmetic*
-   Saylor content

   
 **Requirements for Completion:** In order to complete this course, you
will need to work through each unit and all of its assigned materials.  
    
 Note that you will only receive an official grade on your final exam.
However, in order to adequately prepare for this exam, you will need to
work through the assigned materials in each unit.  
    
 In order to *pass* this course, you will need to earn a score of 70% or
higher on the final exam. Your score on the exam will be tabulated as
soon as you complete it. If you do not pass the exam, you may take it
again.  
    
 **Time Commitment:** This course should take you about **105.5 hours**
to complete. Each unit includes a *time advisory* that lists the amount
of time you are expected to spend on each subunit. These should help you
plan your time accordingly. It may be useful to take a look at these
time advisories and to determine how much time you have over the next
few weeks to complete each unit, and then to set goals for yourself. For
example, Unit 1 should take you approximately 9 hours to complete.
Perhaps you can sit down with your calendar and decide to complete
subunit 1.1 (a total of 3.5 hours) on Monday night; subunits 1.2 (a
total of 2.75 hours) on Tuesday night; subunit 1.3 (a total of 2 hours)
on Wednesday night; etc.  
    

